---
layout: post
title: BPS 2014 Annual Conference
---

Birmingham just outside the train station is a confusing place if you've never been before. Unluckily for me, I had to navigate through it with a time limit in mind! After some confusing turns, I arrived at the conference centre with several minutes to spare. When I registered, I was given a badge that innocuously stated 'Julie Lee, University of Bristol' - thankfully nothing branding me as an outsider student! I rushed to the keynote, which was on a topic definitely not in my research interests or something I really thought about as a field: the psychology of war, to mark the centenary of the First World War. It turned out to be a very interesting set of talks on the psychology, psychiatry, and stigma of those in war (simplifying here). Some interesting insights included wartime psychology being one of the reasons psychology as a whole developing as it did. There was also former chief news correspondent Kate Adie, who provided a funny and captivating account of her time reporting in war zones. She gave us a different perspective on what the others talked about and, further, illuminated us on the contributions of women in psychology - not only the women making munitions and the nurses healing soldiers, but hospitals holding only female GPs! It certainly provided a new outlook on life at that time. Soon after questions were fielded, I dashed off to look at the exhibition hall, keen to look at the stands and chat to some people.

There, I was able to nab some pens, free journals, and other things - as you do. I also had a lunch and met, for the first time, fellow student committee members of the BPS. They were very pleasant and friendly! KCL's institute of psychiatry were there to talk about their master's programs, which was good timing as I am considering applying for theirs. I was able to ask some questions about their courses, application process and open days. Shortly thereafter, it was time for more talks so I headed off to the next hall, where I watched a talk on lateralisation of emotion processing by new mothers and pregnant women. As I've been revising emotion for my upcoming exams, I thought it would be excellent further knowledge, and indeed I learned of a few theories that I hope to incorporate! In fact, this talk has received press coverage by [The Telegraph](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/science/science-news/10812090/Baby-brain-really-does-exist-say-scientists.html) among others.

Next, I listened to a talk on psychotherapy for people with intellectual disabilities. Even though it is certainly not anything remotely related to what I do, still, it was useful to listen to something entirely new. At that point I was hoping to attend a careers talk on research psychology, so I headed there. The speaker was highly entertaining, having reached his role as lecturer through an extremely roundabout process. While I didn't learn much new, it was still a fun talk to attend. After a bit more wandering, I decided to look at the exhibition hall again, but since there was still nearly an hour until the poster session, I chose to loop back around and try to catch the tail end of another talk. Unfortunately, it was just ending, but the next talk was from the same lab group, so I got a similar idea. These talks were on out of body or anomalous experiences, and the second talk looked at whether you were more likely to report sensation on a rubber hand if you'd already had an anomalous experience! The last talk for the session was investigating whether DJs and classical composers were equally skilled at keeping time -- I think I expected to see or hear some DJing but unfortunately that never happened...

Next, I went to the poster session and took some information down, as well as chatted to some people about their research. It was a good experience - I think posters are best for discussion as you're essentially alone with a researcher to talk about it, or at most there are a couple others. After this was of course more talks! I listened to one on emotional intelligence in translators and one on emotional reactivity in people with high anhedonia, again relevant to my emotion revision. As well, I was able to ask a question based on the revision I had done! Of course I then ran off to my last talk for the day, a talk for students generally about the brain and misconceptions and so forth. It was highly entertaining although it was pitched for a rather naïve audience, which we were not. Finally, finally, finally.... It was networking time. I really wish there was more of an opportunity at the beginning, although I suppose if I'd arrived earlier there would have been more chance for that. In any case, I talked to a range of people from recent undergraduates to lecturers - perhaps most usefully, I managed to chat to the speaker of the talk I'd only caught the tail end of. Although I didn't ask much about her talk, it was a good discussion overall.

In general, the conference was a lot less intimidating than I expected. Aside from the keynote, things were far less 'serious' than I expected, on par with many departmental seminars. This experience was really good for showing me what it is like at a conference, and made me determined to at least submit an abstract for a poster next year! Here's hoping. Excitingly, I gave a copy of Psyche to six people - six outside Bristol who will read it and who are actually interested in psychology already, huge win. As well, I gave away two business cards, which was not bad.

There were far less people than I would have thought, something echoed by several others. Perhaps it was due to being the first day only, or having the huge venue... who knows. However, this mismatch in expectations was fueled by accounts I'd read online of American conferences with hundreds upon hundreds of attendees! Not that I'm complaining - this way I was actually able to talk with people at their posters, ask questions at their talks, and generally feel like a 'part of it' as a student. As ever, there was that slightly awkward moment, that beat after someone asks 'so what do you do?'. Nevertheless, in general, I felt able to hold my own and look forward to many more conferences in future (does anyone say that?!).