---
layout: post
title: Ada Lovelace Day 2015
---

Happy Ada Lovelace Day! Today celebrates women's achievements in STEM, named after one of the early 'programmers'/scientists Ada Lovelace.

Despite coming from a very female-dominated undergrad (psychology) and in a PhD programme where five of six are women, with the ratio across years slightly skewed towards having more women... a large majority of the PIs I've worked with have been men, and a majority of the labs we visit as part of our programme are male-led. Just yesterday I watched a video on neuroscience where male voices clearly dominated as experts. I've greatly enjoyed every research I've taken part in, no matter the gender of my supervisor, but still we need more women in high-ranking positions as role models. 

As someone who's interested in the computational aspects of neuroscience, I've experienced male voices talking over me and men favouring to talk to other men. These don't happen often, but highlight the fact that women's voices are often not recognised in STEM subjects. When women *are* heard, sometimes there is the expectation that they must perform even better in order to prove themselves as worthy as men.  This brings to mind a psychology study well-known to my fellow grads that, when asked to specify their gender before a difficult maths test, women performed much poorly than when told their gender would be undisclosed.

So, sad to say, society is still struggling to present women on equal grounds in science, technology, engineering and maths. Let's take this one day to shine a spotlight on women in STEM. #ALD15