---
layout: post
title: Highlights from Cosyne 
---

Apparently people actually read this blog so I thought I’d give a quick summary of my time at Cosyne. I enjoyed the conference a lot and definitely felt like I got much more out of it than at SfN, although this was possibly because the schedule was much more packed than at SfN. The workshops, ad-hoc discussions, talks and posters were all fantastic, and I totally recommend Cosyne for anyone in the computational/systems neuroscience field. I’ll just mention three highlights from the main meeting, outside the main talks and posters.

The first highlight of the conference was Greg Gage from Backyard Brains, who presented the second opening presentation. If you haven’t heard of it, Backyard Brains provides DIY kits for performing your own simple neuroscience experiments. The kits are mainly aimed at educating children, but have been brought on the road to bring neuroscience to all over the world, including all seven continents and even on a plane. At Cosyne, Greg talked about the initiative but also had hilarious and interesting live demos with volunteers from the audience. There was a bug that was anaesthetised then subsequently recorded action potentials from, as well as a “brain-machine interface” with one volunteer controlling another volunteer’s arm using EMG. All this was very fun to watch but what I particularly liked about the presentation was how it made neuroscience lighthearted and fun, and for me really showed that sometimes in the ivory tower of academia we can take things too seriously. 

The next “non-scientific” highlight was Prof. Wei Ji Ma from NYU who presented on the second day his experiences “Growing Up in Science”. The words “honest” and “frank” came up a lot when we were discussing this talk, and it was certainly that. Not only did he impart valuable advice, he also showed through sharing his own experiences that the path to science is not be easy or straightforward, but it can still work out even if you feel like you’re struggling. Definitely check out the series [growing up in science](http://www.cns.nyu.edu/events/growingupinscience/) for more resources from Wei Ji Ma. He also pointed us to the paper [Expectations of brilliance](http://science.sciencemag.org/content/347/6219/262) which relates gender disparity with differing “expectations of brilliance” across fields. 

The third day of the main meeting had the “Equality and Diversity luncheon”, formerly for women at Cosyne but this year extended to a wider audience in light of the recent political climate (e.g. immigration bans). This event consisted mostly of discussions over lunch around issues for women and minorities in academia and included a panel of scientists who shared their own experiences and perspectives on the issue. Three points stood out from this event. The first was a brilliant analogy from Prof. Kay Tye from MIT who illustrated why colleagues and peers sometimes might not “get” that there is a problem, saying like in the face/vase illusion, once you see it (i.e. gender discrimination), you can’t unsee it. This was relevant in light of the senior academics who noted that they often didn’t truly experience gender discrimination until they got to the faculty level. Conversely, as in the case of the illusion, if you can’t see the face or the vase, you just can’t see it and don’t know what others are talking about. For me this was a funny and apt way of describing the situation in academia - with some being keenly aware of the problem and others thinking there *isn’t* a problem until they see it for themselves. The second point of interest came from my own thoughts regarding the belief that the leaky pipeline occurs because women often “choose” to leave for reasons such as family. Prof. Megan Carey from Champalimaud pointed out this couldn’t be just the case, as minorities also face the leaky pipeline problem, yet male minorities don’t have, for example, to take time to have babies. This led me to think that even if it could be argued that women have a “choice”, this choice is severely constrained by the system which biases these factors to affect women more than men. That is, for example, the system is set such that things like maternity leave or returning after maternity leave make it much more difficult for women than men, so they may “choose” to leave academia under these conditions, but more because of the factors going against them, rather than making the choice entirely freely. Finally, Megan Carey ended with a great, pragmatic point why *everyone* in academia should care about gender diversity. That is, we are interested in recruiting and retaining the best talent to advance science; therefore, ,if we don’t include women (and minorities), we are missing out on lots of potential talent. So, whether the reasons are personal or pragmatic, there should be no case against equality and diversity in science.

Those were the three “non-academic” highlights from the main conference, and I really appreciated how the organising committee took a broader view and included “meta-scientific” events as well as talks and posters. Unlike SfN, Cosyne really felt like a more informal “community” of scientists. The workshops were also unmissable, so I recommend going for the whole conference and workshops if you can. Cosyne provides travel grants to first-time attendees, highly-scored presenters, and undergraduates, or you can volunteer and have your registration fees waived. 
